[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The president in Washington
sends word that he wishes
to buy our land.
But how can you buy
or sell the sky?
The land.
The idea is strange to us.
Every part of this Earth
is sacred to my people.
Every shining pine
needle, every sandy shore,
every mist in the dark
woods, every meadow,
all are holy in the memory
and experience of my people.
We're proud of the Earth.
And it is part of us.
The perfume flowers
are our sisters.
The bear, the deer, the great
eagle, these are our brothers.
Each ghostly reflection in
the clear water of the lakes
tells of events and memories
in the life of my people.
The water's memory is the
voice of my father's father.
The rivers are our brothers.
They carry our canoes
and feed our children.
If we sell you
our land, remember
that the air is precious to us.
That the air shares its spirit
with all the life it supports.
The wind that gave our
grandfather his first breath
also receives his last sigh.
This, we know.
The Earth does
not belong to man.
Man belongs to the Earth.
All things are connected like
the blood that unites us all.
Man did not weave
the web of life.
He is merely a strand in it.
Whatever it does to the
web, he does to himself.
Your destiny is a mystery to us.
What will happen when the
buffalo are all slaughtered?
secret corners of the forest
are heavy with the
scent of many men?
And the view of the ripe hills
is blotted by talking wires?
The end of living and the
beginning of survival.
When the last red man has
vanished with his wilderness
and his memory is only the
shadow of a cloud moving
across the prairie, will
these shores and forests still
be here?
Will there be any spirit
of my people left?
We love this Earth, as a newborn
loves his mother's heartbeat.
So if we sell you our land,
love it as we have loved it.
Care for it as
we've cared for it.
Hold in your mind the
memory of the land
as it is when you receive it.
Preserve the land
for all children.
And love it as God loves us all.
One thing we know,
there's only one God.
No man, be he red man or
white man, can be a part.
We are brothers, after all.
>> Joseph Campbell reading the
famous speech said to have been
delivered in 1854 by the
Native American visionary Chief
Seattle.
Campbell immersed himself in the
mythology of American Indians.
Their language,
stories, and rituals.
He felt a kinship with
their understanding
of the covenant between
human beings and nature.
An accord based on reverence and
respect required by the reality
that we humans live off our
environment and not just in it.
He often told the story of the
young Sioux Indian Black Elk
who provided us with one
of the great insights
into the power of
myth and symbols
to change how we see the world.
In a state of ecstasy,
Black Elk saw himself
on the central
mountain of the world
and it turned out to be
Harney Peak in South Dakota.
And then he said, but the
central Mountain is everywhere.
In other words, every one
of us is on a sacred site,
if only we recognize it.
You will hear Joseph Campbell
expound on that story later
in this broadcast.
And you will, I
believe, understand
why he wanted every
new generation
to rediscover the power of
myth to awaken in all of us
a sense of wonder at
the world around us.
When we met for
these conversations,
he was working on a monumental
multi-volume historical atlas
of world mythology.
In this and all his work,
he took his inspiration
from the English poet and
mystic William Blake, who said,
"arise and drink your bliss, for
everything that lives is holy."
>> What does it mean
to have a sacred place?
>> This is a term
I like to use now,
as an absolute necessity
for anybody today.
You must have a room
or a certain hour a day
or so where you do not know
what was in the newspapers
that morning.
You don't know who
your friends are.
You don't know what
you owe to anybody.
anybody owes to you.
But a place where you can simply
experience and bring forth what
you are and what you might be.
This is the place of
creative incubation.
And first, you might find that
nothing's happening there.
But if you have a sacred place
and use it and take advantage
of it, something will happen.
>> This place does for
you what the plains did
for the hunters--
>> For them, the whole
thing was a sacred place.
You see?
But most of our
action is economically
or socially determined and
does not come out of our life.
I don't know whether you've
had the experience I've had,
but as you get older, the claims
of the environment upon you
are so great that you hardly
know where the hell you are.
What is it you intended?
You're always doing something
that is required of you.
This minute, that
minute, another minute.
Where is your bliss station?
You know?
To find it.
Get a phonograph and put
on the records, the music
that you really love.
Even if it's corny music
that nobody else respects.
The one that you like or
the book you want to read.
Get it done and have a
place in which to do it.
They get the now
feeling of life.
These people had it
for the whole world
that they were living in.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We talked about the
effect of the spreading plain
on mythology.
This plain clearly bounded
by a circular horizon,
with that great blue dome
of an exalting heaven above.
Hawks and eagles hovering.
The blazing sun passing.
Night moon rising.
And I can see the effect on
people's stories of that.
But what about the people who
lived in the dense foliage
of the jungle?
>> Total transformation of
environment and of psychology
and everything else.
>> No horizon.
>> No dome of the sky.
>> No dome to the sky.
A lot of birds up there.
And the heavy
vegetation underneath,
with scorpions and
poisonous serpents.
And the in-between distances
of trees, trees, trees.
No sense of perspective.
Colin Turnbull tells
us a marvelous story
of being a pygmy
out of the forest.
He brings this pygmy, who had
never been out of the jungle,
onto a mountain top.
And suddenly, they
come over hill
and there's an extensive
plain out there.
And the poor little fellow
was utterly terrified.
Had no way of judging
perspective and distance.
He thought that the animals
grazing on the plain out there
was so small that
they were ants.
That they were just across
the way and so forth.
And it just totally baffled and
he rushes back into the forest.
You have a different
mythology there.
relationship
to the hunt and everything else.
The forest is home.
You are at home in the forest.
Where you and I would
be, perhaps, ill at ease.
Thinking what's behind that
tree and all this kind of thing.
The sense of the beautiful
simple delight in there--
the forest.
And the deity is the
master of the forest--
the forest master.
>> And what impresses me
is that these people--
the hunters and the
searchers for the roots
and for the berries--
they're participating
in their landscape.
They are part of that world.
>> Absolutely.
>> And it becomes
sacred to them.
Place becomes sacred.
>> Every feature of it does.
>> We, moderns, are stripping
the world of its natural
revelations of nature.
>> I know it.
>> I think of--
you remember that
wonderful pygmy legend
of the little boy who finds the
bird of the most beautiful song
in the forest?
>> And he brings it home.
Doesn't he?
And he asked his
father to bring food
for the bird and
the father doesn't
want to feed only a bird.
And one time, the
father kills the bird.
And when he killed the
bird, he killed his own life
and he died.
Is that--
>> That's it.
>> And the legend says
the man killed the bird.
And with the bird,
he killed the song.
And with the song, himself.
Isn't that a story
about what happens
when human beings destroy
their environment,
destroy their world,
destroy nature,
and the revelations of nature?
>> Destroy their own nature.
>> Human nature, too.
They killed the song.
>> They killed the song.
>> And isn't mythology
the story of the song?
>> Mythology is the song.
It's the flight of the
imagination, inspired
by the energies of the
body and in its life.
>> What happened as human
beings turned from the hunting
of animals to the
planting of seeds?
What happened to the
mythic imagination?
>> Well, I try to
think of it this way.
An animal, as I think
I've said before,
is sort of a total entity.
And when you kill that
animal, that animal is dead.
But when you cut down a
plant, new sprouts come out.
Pruning is helpful to a plant.
Also in forests, where a good
deal of the origination of myth
is to be recognized,
out of rock comes life.
Even in these forests here,
the beautiful Redwoods.
I was in wonderful forest
right near Mendocino
and there, there are
some great, great stumps
from enormous trees
that were cut down
some decades and decades ago.
And out of them are coming
these bright new little children
who are part of the same plant.
So there's a sense of death
as not death, somehow.
That death is required for
new fresh life and so on.
And the individual isn't
quite an individual.
He is a member of a plant.
Jesus uses the term, where
he says, I am the vine
and you are the branches.
That vineyard idea is
a totally different one
for the separate
entity of the animal.
>> And this makes a difference
on the stories you tell--
>> Oh, the whole feeling
about what life is.
>> What stories did this
experience of the plant give
rise to you?
Your favorite stories
in plant mythology.
>> Well, the cutting up
and burial and then growing
of the plant world.
The world of the
plant that you eat,
being already a
cut up dead body,
is the dominant motif I would
say in most of the tales.
It occurs all over the place,
particularly in the Pacific
cultures and in the Americas.
>> Tell me that story of the
origin of maize as Longfellow
barred it from the Chippewas.
Didn't he?
Or the Algonquins.
>> Well, it's an
Algonquin story.
And it is simply of the boy.
In his vision, he
sees a young man
come to him with plumes on his
head and green and so forth.
And the visitant and invites the
young man to a wrestling match.
And allows him to win.
And wins and wins.
This happens three
or four times.
But he tells him,
the last time I come,
you must kill me and bury me
and take care of the place
where you will have buried me.
And the boy then,
in the last one,
actually does what he
has been told to do.
Plants the man, the visitant.
And in time, comes back
and sees the corn growing.
And it was a boy who had been
of concern for his father, who
was a hunter, but old.
And he was thinking,
isn't there some other way
to get food besides this one?
And so it came to him
out of his intentions.
A lovely story.
>> Some other way of
getting food than hunting.
>> Yeah.
>> But the idea is
that this visitor,
this figure in the vision has
to die and be buried before
the plant can grow from
the remains of his body.
>> And that's the main theme.
It comes up, I mean,
almost the duplicate
of this one throughout
Polynesia, for instance.
>> Well, there's one in
Polynesia about the legend
of the maiden Hina.
You remember that one?
>> Well, all of the legends
in the Polynesian area have
a maiden named Hina.
And she's associated
with the moon.
And the death and
resurrection of the moon
is a dominant theme.
>> What happens to
her in this legend?
>> Well, the girl who loves
to bathe in a certain pool
and there's a great eel that
is swimming around in the pool.
And day after day, he
scrapes across her thigh
as she's bathing.
And then one fine, lovely
day, he turns into a young man
and he becomes her
lover for a moment.
And then goes away and comes
back, again, and back, again.
And then one time when he comes
he says, just as the Algonquin
visitant, now next time I come
to visit you, you must kill me.
And I cut off my head
and bury my head.
And she does so.
And that grows from the
buried head, a coconut tree.
And when you picked coconut
and looked at the coconut,
you can see it's just
the size of the head.
And you can see eyes and
things in the little nodules
that simulate the head.
>> So what you have is the same
story springing up in cultures
unrelated to each other.
What is it saying?
>> Well, to such an
extent that it's stunning.
And after years and years and
years of reading these things,
I'm still overwhelmed
at the similarities
in cultures that
are far, far apart.
There are two
explanations of this.
One explanation is that the
human psyche is essentially,
the same all over the world.
It is the inward aspect
of the human body
which is essentially, the
same all over the world.
With the same organs,
with the same instincts,
with the same impulse systems,
with the same conflicts,
the same fears.
There is also the counter
theory of diffusion.
Now, for instance, when
agriculture is first developed,
let's say, in the Near East
or in Southeast Asia-- these
are the two big centers
in the old world.
Then the art of tilling the
soil goes forth from this area.
And along with it,
goes the mythology
that has to do with
fertilizing the Earth
and bringing up the plants.
Killing the body.
Cutting it up, then burying
it and having the plant come.
That myth will go with the
agricultural tradition.
You won't find it in a
hunting culture tradition.
So that there are historical,
as well as psychological aspects
to this problem.
>> In all of these stories,
there is someone dying--
a hero dying--
in order for life
to appear, again.
What does that say to you?
>> Let me tell you
one story here.
This isn't a story.
This is a ritual.
It's in New Guinea.
And it's associated with the
men's societies in New Guinea
and they are horror societies.
Because they really enact the
myth of death and resurrection
and cannibalistic consumption.
And you have the myth there of
the buried body and the life
coming out of it.
You know this as the basic myth.
Now we're going to enact it.
So here's the sacred fields.
The drums going and chants
going and then pauses.
And this went on for three or
four or five days on and on.
And rituals are boring.
They just wear you out.
And then you break
through to something else.
Then comes the great moment.
The young boys who are
being initiated into manhood
were now to have their
first sexual experience.
There was a great shed of
enormous logs supported
by two uprights over here.
And the young woman comes in
all ornamented as a deity.
And she is brought to
lie down in this place
beneath the great roof.
And the boys then, with the
drums going and chanting
going on, one after another--
there are about six boys--
have their first
permitted or public
intercourse with the girl.
And when the last boy is
with her, in full embrace,
the supports are withdrawn.
The logs drop and the
couple are killed.
There is the union
of male and female,
again, as they were
in the beginning
before the separation
took place.
There is the union of a
beginning and death, again.
And they're both the same thing.
The little pair are
pulled out and roasted
and eaten right that evening.
Enacting the myth in
its essential character.
Can't beat that.
>> And the truth to--
>> That's the
sacrifice of the mass.
One of the wonderful things
in the Catholic ritual
is going to communion.
There you're taught
that this is the body
and blood of the Savior.
And you take it to you
and you turn inward.
And there, he's
working within you.
>> The truth to which
the ritual point is--
>> The nature of life itself
to be realized in the acts
of life.
When in the hunting cultures
a sacrifice is made,
it is, as it were, a gift, a
bribe, as it were, to the deity
that is being invited
to do something for us
or to give us something.
When a figure is sacrificed
in the plating culture,
that figure is the God.
The person who died, was
buried, and became the food
is Christ crucified from whose
body the food of the spirit
comes.
There is a sublimation
of what originally
was a very solid vegetal image.
He is on the Holy
Rood-- the tree.
He is himself, the
fruit of the tree.
Jesus is the fruit
of eternal life,
which was on the second
tree in the Garden of Eden.
When man had eaten of the fruit
of the first tree, the Tree
of the Knowledge
of Good and Evil,
he was said to have been
expelled from the garden.
He had already expelled
himself from the garden.
The garden is the place
of unity, non-duality.
Non-duality of male and female.
Non-duality of man and God.
Non-duality of good and evil.
You eat the duality and
you're on the way out.
So this tree of the non-duality
is the tree of the exit.
Now the tree of coming
back to the garden
is the Tree of Immortal Life.
Where you know that I
and the Father are one.
And the two that seem
to become one, again.
And this is exactly the tree
under which the Buddha sits.
>> The Tree of Wisdom.
>> The Tree of Immortal Life, of
the Knowledge of Immortal Life.
And the Buddha under his tree
and Christ hanging on his tree
are the same image.
They are the same image.
The one who has
died to the flesh
and been reborn in the spirit.
This is an essential experience
of any mystical realization.
You die to your flesh and
are born to your spirit.
You identify yourself with
the consciousness and life,
of which your body
is, but the vehicle.
You guide to the vehicle
and become identified
in your consciousness with
that of which the vehicle is
the carrier.
Do you understand me?
And that is the God.
So that what you get in
the vegetation traditions
is this notion of identity
behind the surface
display of duality.
Identity behind it all.
All of these are
manifestations of the one.
The one radiance shines
through all things.
The function of
art, in a way, is
to reveal through the
object here, the radiance.
And that's what you
get when you see
the beautiful organization
of a fortunately composed
work of art.
You just say aha.
Somehow it speaks to the
order in your own life.
This is a realization
through art of the very thing
that the religions are
concerned to render.
>> That death is life and life
is death and that the two are
in accord.
>> You have to have a balance
between death and life.
They are two aspects of the
same thing, which is being,
becoming.
>> And that's in all
of these stories.
>> All of them.
I don't know one where
death is rejected.
>> This idea of sacrifice is
so foreign to our world today.
>> Well, the old idea of being
sacrificed is not what we think
at all.
Just consider, I think the
great model of sacrifice
is the Mayan Indian Ballgame.
They had a kind of
basketball game.
It was a loop there,
up in the stadium wall.
And the idea was to get this
big heavy ball through that.
I don't know how they did
it with their shoulders,
their heads, or
something or other.
And the captain of
the winning team
was sacrificed on the field by
the captain of the losing team.
His head was cut off.
And going to your sacrifice as
the winning stroke of your life
is the essence of the
early sacrificial idea.
There's a wonderful story that I
found in the Jesuit relations--
You know, the Jesuits
here in the 17th century
as missionaries up in Canada
and northern New York State
and so forth--
of a young Iroquois
boy who had just
been captured by the
Hurons, or perhaps
it was the other way around.
I've forgotten.
And he was being brought
to be tortured to death.
The Northeast Indians engaged
in a systematic torture, which
would go on for a long time.
And the ordeal was to be
sustained with a smile
without flinching.
That was it.
That was real manhood.
But the boy is brought
to this as though he were
being brought to his wedding.
He is singing.
And the people with
him are treating him
as though they were his hosts
and he was the honored guest.
And he played the
game with them,
knowing where he was going.
And the priest
describing the thing
are absolutely bewildered
by the situation.
And they say the mockery
of this kind of hospitality
for people who are then going
to become the brutes-- no.
Those people were the priests.
And this was the
sacrifice of the altar.
And that boy was
Jesus, by analogy.
And the priest, every
day is celebrating
mass, which is an imitation
or repetition actually,
of the sacrifice of the cross.
That's what this
priest was witnessing.
But then you have it also
in the Acts of John--
Jesus before going to
crucified, the Jesus dance.
That's one of the most
beautiful passages
in the Christian tradition.
In the Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John gospels,
it's certainly
mentioned that we sang
a hymn and Jesus went forth.
Well, here you have the whole
hymn described in a ring.
Jesus in the center
saying join hands.
We'll sing and we'll dance.
And he says, I am this.
I am that.
I am so forth, so forth.
Amen.
Oh, my god, it's grand.
And then he walks
out to be crucified.
When you go to your
death that way as a God,
you are going to
your eternal life.
What's sad about that?
Let's make it great.
And they do.
>> The god of death is
the lord of the dance.
>> The god of death is the
lord of sex at the same time.
>> What do you mean?
>> It's a marvelous thing.
One after another, you can
see these god's gay day.
The death god of the Haitian,
Vodou, is also the sex god,
Wotan had one eye covered
and the other uncovered.
You see?
And at the same time
was the lord of life.
Osiris, the lord of
death and the lord
of the generation of life.
It's a basic theme.
That which dies is born.
You have to have death
in order to have life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now this is the origin thought
really, of the headhunt.
In Southeast Asia
and particularly
in the Indonesian
zone, the headhunt--
right up to now--
has been a sacred act.
It's a sacred killing.
Unless there is death,
there cannot be birth.
And a young man, before
he can be permitted
to marry and become a
father, must have gone forth
and had his kill.
>> What does that say to you?
>> Well, that every generation
has to die in order that
the next generation should come.
As soon as you begin or
give birth to a child,
you're the dead one.
The child is the new
life and you are simply
the protector of that new life.
>> Your time has
come and you know it.
>> Well, that's why there
is this deep psychological
association of
begetting and dying.
>> Isn't there some relationship
between what you're saying
and this fact that a father
will give his life for his son,
a mother will give her
life for her child?
>> There's a wonderful paper--
I don't know whether you
knew that I would love
to have talked to this point.
There's a wonderful
paper by Schopenhauer,
who's one of my three
favorite philosophers,
called The Foundation
of Morality.
There, he asked exactly the
question that you've asked.
How is it that a
human being can so
participate in the
peril or pain of another
that without thought,
spontaneously he
sacrifices his own
life to the other.
How can this happen,
that what we normally
think of as the
first law of nature--
namely self-preservation--
is suddenly dissolved
and there's a breakthrough?
In Hawaii, some four
or five years ago,
there was an
extraordinary adventure
that represents this problem.
There's a place there
called the Pali, where
the trade winds
from the North come
breaking through a
great ridge of rocks--
of mountain-- and they come
through with a great blast
of wind.
And people like to go up
there to get their hair blown
around and so forth.
Or to commit suicide, like
jumping off the Golden Gate
Bridge.
Well, a police
car was on its way
up the early little road
that used to go up there.
And they saw just beyond
the railing that keeps cars
from rolling over, a
young man actually,
clearly about to jump and
prepare himself to jump.
The police car stopped.
The policeman on the right
jumps out to grab the boy
and grabs him just as he
jumped and was himself
being pulled over.
And would have gone over
if the second cop hadn't
gotten around, grabbed him, and
pulled the two of them back.
There was a long
description of this.
It was a marvelous thing in
the newspapers at that time.
And the policeman was asked,
why didn't you let go?
I mean, you would
have lost your life.
And you see what
happened to that man.
This is what's known as
one-pointed meditation.
Everything else in
his life dropped off.
His duty to his family.
His duty to his job.
His duty to his own career.
All of his wishes
and hopes for life
just disappeared and
he was about to go.
And his answer was
I couldn't let go.
If I had-- and I'm quoting
almost word for word-
if I had let that
young man go, I
could not have lived
another day of my life.
How come?
Schopenhauer's
answer is, this is
the breakthrough of a
metaphysical realization
that you and the other are one.
And that the
separateness is only
an effect of the temporal
forms of sensibility
of time and space.
And our true reality is in
that unity with all life.
It is a metaphysical truth that
becomes spontaneously realized
because it's the real
truth of your life.
Now, you might say the
hero is the one who
has given his physical
life, you might say,
to some order of
realization of that truth.
It may appear that
I'm one with my tribe
or I'm one with the
people of a certain kind
or I'm one with life.
This is not a concept.
This is a realization.
You see what I mean?
>> No.
Explain it.
>> And the concept of love your
neighbor and all ought to put
you in tune with that fact.
But whether you love
your neighbor or not--
bing.
The thing grabs you
and you do this thing.
You don't even know who it is.
That policeman didn't know
who that young man was.
And Schopenhauer
says in small ways,
you can see this happening
every day all the time.
This is a theme that can be
seen moving life in the world.
People doing nice
things for each other.
>> What do you think has
happened to this mythic idea--
the hero in our culture today?
>> It comes up in an
experience, I think.
I remember during
the Vietnam War,
seeing on the television, the
young men in helicopters going
out to rescue one of their
companions at great risk
to themselves.
They didn't have to
rescue that young man.
That's the same thing working.
It puts them in touch with
the experience of being alive.
Going to the office every day,
you don't get that experience.
But suddenly, you're
ripped into being alive.
And life is pain and life is
suffering and life is horror.
But, by God, you're alive.
And it's spectacular.
And this is a case
of being alive--
rescuing that young man.
>> But I also know
a man who said once,
after years of standing on
the platform of the subway,
I die a little bit
down there every day,
but I know I'm doing
so for my family.
There are small
acts of heroism--
>> That's right.
>> That occur without regard to
the nobility or the notoriety
that you attract for it.
>> That's right.
>> And the mother does it by the
isolation she endures in behalf
of the family of--
>> Motherhood is a sacrifice.
On our veranda in Hawaii,
there are little birds
that Jean likes to feed.
And each year, there have
been one or two mother birds.
And if you've ever seen a mother
bird plagued by her progeny
for food-- that the mother
should regurgitate their meal
to them--
and two of them--
or five of them,
in one case-- flopping all
over this poor little mother.
They bigger than
she, in some cases.
You just think, well, this
is the symbol of motherhood.
This is just giving of your
substance and everything
to this progeny.
This should be it in marriage.
A marriage is a relationship.
When you make a
sacrifice in marriage,
you're not sacrificing
to the other.
You're sacrificing
to the relationship.
And this is symbolized,
for example,
in that Chinese
image of the tai chi.
The tao with the dark and
the light interacting.
It's a well-known sign.
That is the relationship
of yang and yin--
male and female.
Which is what a marriage is.
And that's what you are.
You're no longer this.
You're the relationship.
And so marriage, I would
say, is not a love affair.
It's an ordeal.
>> An ordeal?
>> The ordeal is sacrifice
of ego to the relationship
of a twoness, which
now becomes the one.
>> One not only biologically,
but spiritually.
And primarily, spiritually.
>> It's primarily spiritually.
>> But the necessary function
of marriage in order to create
our own images and perpetuate
ourselves in children,
but it's not the
primary one, as you say.
>> No.
That's really, just the
elementary aspect of marriage.
There are two completely
different stages of marriage.
First is the youthful marriage,
following the wonderful impulse
that nature has given us in
the interplay of the sexes
biologically.
And then the
reproduction of children.
But there comes a time when the
child graduates from the family
and the family is left.
I've been amazed at the
number of my friends
who are in their
40s or 50s go apart.
Who have had a perfectly decent
life together with the child,
but they interpreted their
union in terms of relationship
through the child.
They did not
interpret it in terms
of their own personal
relationship to each other.
>> Utterly incompatible with the
idea of doing one's own thing.
>> It's not one's
own thing, you see.
It is, in the sense,
one's own thing.
But the one isn't just
you, it's the two together.
And that's a purely
mythological image.
Of the sacrifice of the visible
entity for a transcendent unit.
Cracking eggs to make an omelet.
And by the right
person, we reconstruct
the image of the incarnate God.
And that's what marriage is.
>> The right person.
How does one choose
the right person?
>> Your heart tells you.
It ought to.
>> Your inner being.
>> That's the mystery.
>> You recognize
your other self.
>> Well, I don't know.
But there's a flash that comes
and something in your nose
that this is the one.
>> What has mythology
told you about death?
What do you think about death?
>> Well, the way, if one can
identify with the consciousness
of which the body is a
vehicle and really achieve
an identification with the
consciousness of which the body
is a vehicle, not
knowing what it is--
undifferentiated consciousness--
one can let the body go.
I like what I heard
of Woody Allen.
"I'm not afraid to die.
I just don't want to be
there when it happens."
You can have disengaged yourself
from the body and not be there,
you might say.
>> And yet, you know from myth
and nature that the body dies.
It perishes.
It rots.
We're back to the
beginning of the--
>> So you expect it.
Growing old, you know
what's happening.
The body is rotting.
It's dying.
It's losing its energy.
There's more mass
than energy here.
And the identification then
with the life, which in a plant
survives pruning,
cutting, and even eating,
the plant is right back there,
again, is, you might say,
a biological image
that is metaphorical
of this spiritual mystery.
>> There's a wonderful
report of the Indians riding
into the rain of bullets
from Custer's men.
And they're saying,
it's a good day to die.
>> It's a great day to die.
They're not hanging on.
That's the message of the myth.
You, as you know
yourself, are not
the final term of your being.
And you must die to
that, one way or another.
In giving of yourself
to something or in being
annihilated, actually,
physically to return,
you might say, or to recognize .
Life is always on
the edge of death.
Always.
And one should lack fear and
have the courage of life.
That's the principle
the initiation
of all of the heroic stories.
>> What's the central story?
Do you have a story
that's central to this?
>> The "Sir Gawain
and the Green Knight."
The Green Knight of his
court is in session.
And there rides into the court
on a great big green horse,
a giant knight.
And the knight says,
I have a challenge.
I have an adventure.
I challenge anyone
here to come down
here and take this great
big ax and cut my head off.
And then one year from today,
meet me at a green chapel--
and he'd tell them roughly
where the green chapel is--
and I'll cut his head off.
And the only knight
who had the courage
to accept this curious
invitation was Gawain.
And the knight
gets off his horse.
Sticks out his neck.
Gawain comes down with his
ax and there's the head.
And then the knight stands
up, picks up the head,
gets on the horse,
and rides off.
Says I'll see you in a year.
Well that year, everybody
was very generous to Gawain
and he rides off for the year.
As the day approaches,
he finds himself
before a little hunter's cabin.
And he thinks he'll
ask advice here as
to where the green chapel is.
And tells them I've got
to be there in three days.
And the hunter greets him
and Gawain tells his story.
And the hunter says,
well, the green chapel,
he's just down the way here.
He says it's about
a couple yards.
And why don't you just
spend the next three days
with us and we'll
entertain you and then you
go to this adventure.
All right.
Very well.
So the hunter says,
well, I've got to go out
for the day on the hunt.
And he says you'll
spend the night with us.
And then in the
morning, I'll go forth.
And in the evening,
I'll come back
and I'll give everything I would
have got during the day to you
and you give to me what you
would have got during the day.
In the morning, the hunter
rides off and Gawain's in bed.
And in comes to the hunter's
gorgeous, beautiful wife.
And she tickles Gawain's
chin and invites him to love.
Well, he's an Arthurian knight--
a night of Arthur's court.
And to betray his
host is the last thing
that a knight can submit to.
So he resists this woman.
And she's very, very aggressive.
And he's very, very
stern in his position.
And finally she says, well,
let me give you a kiss, anyhow.
So she gives him one big
smack and that's that.
In the evening, the hunter comes
back with a great hall of game.
Throws it on the floor and
Gawain gives him a kiss.
And they laugh and that's that.
Second morning, a similar event.
The wife comes in and
Gawain gets two kisses.
And the hunter comes back
with about half as much game
and he gets two kisses.
They laugh and that's that.
The third morning, the
wife comes in-- now here's
a man about to meet his death.
He's about to have
his head chopped off.
It's a beautiful woman.
The last moment
of the possibility
of this wonderful fulfillment.
And, again, he resists.
She gives him three
kisses and her daughter.
And she says, this will
protect you against any danger.
The hunter comes home with
just one silly smelly fox.
Throws it on the
ground and he gets
three kisses, but no daughter.
So comes the time now to go
and have your head chopped off.
Do you see what the tests
are of the night here?
One is sex, lust.
And the other is courage.
So he approaches
the green chapel
with the green knight whom
he's about to encounter.
And he hears the knight
whetting this great knife--
this great ax.
He comes to it and the
knight is there, certainly--
the great big green fellow.
And he greets him.
And said, OK.
Put your leg down
there on this block
and I'll chop your head off.
And he lifts the
ax And he says no.
Stretch out a little more.
He does this three times.
And then the ax comes
down and just cuts
his neck a little bit.
The green knight says
that's the daughter.
Well, this is the origin
legend of the knights of god.
So here's the knight who
really transcended the two
great temptations--
fear of death and lust for
sex and the joys of life.
>> And the moral?
>> And moral is that the
realization of your bliss,
your true being comes when you
have put aside the, what might
be called, a passing moment
with its terror and with its
temptations and its statement
of requirements of life that you
should live this way.
>> What is that story about--
and I forget where it comes
from-- about the camel and then
the lion.
And along the way, you
lose the burden of youth.
>> The three transformations
of the spirit.
That's Nietzsche.
That's the prologue to
Thus Spake Zarathustra.
>> Tell me that story.
>> When you are a child, when
you are young and a young
person, you are a camel.
The camel gets down on its
knees and says put a load on me.
This is obedience.
This is receiving the
instruction and information
that your society knows
you must have in order
to live a competent life.
When the camel is well loaded,
he gets up on his feet--
struggles to his feet and
runs out into the desert,
where he becomes
transformed into a lion.
The heavier the load, the
more powerful the lion.
The function of the lion
is to kill a dragon.
And the name of
the dragon is thou
shalt. And on every
scale of the dragon,
there is a thou shalt imprinted.
Some of it comes from 2,000
years, 4,000 years ago.
Some of it comes from yesterday
morning's newspaper headline.
When the dragon is
killed, the lion
is transformed into a child.
An innocent child living
out of its own dynamic.
And Nietzsche uses the
term [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]..
A wheel rolling out
of its own center.
That's what you become.
That is the mature individual.
The thou shalt is
the civilizing force.
It turns a human animal into
a civilized human being.
But then the one who is
thrown off the thou shalt
is still a civilized
human being.
You see, he has been
humanized, you might say,
by the thou shalt system.
So his performance
now as a child
is not simply childlike at all.
He has assimilated the
culture and thrown it off
as a thou shout.
But this is the
way in any artwork,
you go to work and study an art.
You study the techniques.
You study all the rules.
And the rules are put
upon you by a teacher.
Then there comes a time
of using the rules.
Not being used by them.
Do you understand
what I'm saying?
>> You're--
>> One way is to follow--
I always tell my students,
follow your bliss.
>> Follow your bliss?
>> Your bliss.
Where the deep sense
of being inform.
And going where your
body and soul want to go.
When you have that
feeling, then stay with it
and don't let anyone
throw you off.
Have you ever read
Sinclair Lewis' "Babbitt?"
>> Not in a long time.
>> Do you remember
the last line?
I've never done the thing
I wanted to in all my life.
>> Quite an--
>> That's the man who
never followed his bliss.
Well, I heard that line.
I was living in
Bronxville when I
was teaching at Sarah Lawrence.
Before I was married,
I used to be eating out
in the restaurants of the
town for my lunch and dinners.
And Thursday night was the
maid's night off in Bronxville
so that all the families
were out in the restaurants.
And one fine evening, I was in
my favorite restaurant there.
It was a Greek restaurant.
And at the table was
sitting a father, a mother,
and a scrawny little
boy about 12 years old.
The father says to the boy,
drink your tomato juice.
And the boy says,
I don't want to.
And the father,
with a louder voice,
says drink your tomato juice.
And the mother
says, don't make him
do what he doesn't want to do.
The father looks
at her and he says,
he can't go through life
doing what he wants to do.
He said if he does only what
he wants to do, he'll be dead.
Look at me.
I've never done the thing
I wanted to in all my life.
I said my God.
"Babbitt" incarnate.
And that's the man who
never followed his bliss.
Well, you may have
a success in life,
but then just think of it.
What kind of life was it?
What good is it?
You've never done anything you
wanted to in all your life.
>> What happens when
you follow your bliss?
>> You come to bliss.
This should be it in marriage.
I mean, that's the sense
of the marriage ceremony.
In the Middle Ages,
a favorite image
that occurs in
many, many contexts
is the wheel of fortune.
There's the hub of
the wheel and there's
the revolving rim of the wheel.
And if you are attached
to the rim of the wheel,
that's a fortune.
You will be either above,
going down at the bottom,
or coming up.
But if you are at the hub,
you're in the same place
all the time.
And that's the sense
of the marriage vow.
I take you in health or
sickness and wealth or poverty.
But I take you and
you are my bliss.
Not the wealth that
you might bring
me, nor the social
prestige, but you.
And that's following your bliss.
I came to this idea of
bliss because in Sanskrit--
which is the great spiritual
language of the world.
And they know all about
it and have known about it
for a long time--
the transcendent
is transcendent.
But there are three terms
that bring you to the brink,
you might say, of the jumping
off place to the ocean.
And the three terms
are [NON-ENGLISH]..
The word [NON-ENGLISH]
means being,
[NON-ENGLISH] means
full consciousness,
and [NON-ENGLISH] means rapture.
So I thought, I don't know
whether my consciousness
is full consciousness or not.
I don't know whether my being
is the proper being or not.
But I do know where
my rapture is.
So let me hang onto
rapture and that
would bring me both being
and full consciousness.
And it works.
>> What was your rapture?
>> Well, it started
with Indians.
And then it went on into more
and more mythological matters
and the realm of
the arts, music.
And when I met Jean,
then the dance came in.
And this is it.
Just stay with that.
>> And one doesn't have
to be a poet to do this.
Carpenters do it.
>> A poet is--
>> Farmers do it.
>> Simply one who's made a
profession and a lifestyle
of being in touch with that.
Most people have to be
concerned with other things.
They get themselves involved in
economic and other activities.
Or you're drafted
into a war that isn't
the one you're interested in.
And how to hold
to this umbilical,
you might say, in
those circumstances.
That's a technique each
one has to work out
for himself somehow.
But most people
living in that realm
of what might be called
our occasional concerns,
they all have the
capacity that's
waiting to be awakened to
move to this other place.
I know it.
I've seen it happen in students.
A wonderful way of teaching
we had at Sarah Lawrence,
where I taught for 38 years, I'd
have an individual conference
with every one of
my students at least
once a fortnight for
half an hour or so.
And there, you're talking
on about the things
that students ought
to be reading.
And suddenly, you
hit on something
that the student
really responds to.
You can see the eyes open.
The complexion changes.
A life possibility
has opened there.
And all you can
say to yourself is
I hope this child
hangs onto that.
They may or may not.
But when they do, they've
found a life right there
in the room with you.
>> How would you advise somebody
to tap that spring of eternal
life?
that joy that is right there?
>> Well, we're having
experiences all the time which
may, on occasion, render
some sense of this.
A little intuition
of where your joy is.
Grab it.
No one can tell you
what it's going to be.
I mean, you've got to learn
to recognize your own depths.
>> Do you ever have this
sense when you're following
your bliss, as I
have in moments,
of being helped by hidden hands?
>> All the time.
It's miraculous.
I even have a
superstition that has
grown on me as the
result of invisible hands
coming all the time.
Namely, that if you
do follow your bliss,
you put yourself
on a kind of track
that has been there all
the while waiting for you.
And the life that you
ought to be living
is the one you're
living, somehow.
And when you can
see it, you begin
to deal with people who are
in the field of your bliss.
And they open doors to you.
I say follow your bliss
and don't be afraid.
And doors will open
where you didn't
know they were going to be.
>> You ever have sympathy for
the man who has no invisible
means of support?
>> There's no invisible mean.
Yes.
He's the one that
evokes compassion--
the poor chap.
And to see him stumbling
around when there's water
and what life is right there it
really, it evokes one's pity.
>> Right there?
Right there?
You believe that?
>> Yes.
>> The waters of eternal life.
>> Right there.
>> Where?
>> Wherever you are.
If you're following your bliss.
you're having that
joy, that refreshment,
that life all the time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]